---
layout: page
title: 11.2 - Political Uses for Minor Feelings
nav_exclude: true
---

# 11.2 - Political Uses for Minor Feelings

Welcome back, comrades! Today we'll discuss the role of rage in social justice movements, using Cherry's theoretical/activist work on a typology of anger.

Anger occupies an important place in social justice movements &mdash; yet paradoxically is often sidelined or criticized; the frequent response from well-meaning allies is to suggest calm, polite, neutral counterargument &mdash; to defend civility, in other words, even if it means slowing or pausing civic action. Cherry takes up this problem, reminding us that "Anger can be a force for good on the battlefield for justice. We must remember this in the face of urges to abolish it altogether." She describes, through constructing a typology of anger, what she calls "Lordean rage," after Audre Lorde &mdash; a kind of rage "that is well-suited to maintain itself just as it is, without needing to get out of the way so that 'better' emotions can get to work."

The book from which this is excerpted, *The Case for Rage*, attempts to recuperate anger to show how it's a positive force in organizing resistance without removing pressure from the people and systems and institutions perpetrating racism, sexism, ableism, queer- and trans-phobia, xenophobia and other forms of discrimination. Anger at injustice can be transformative, optimistic, motivating, productive, and appropriately targeted. Cherry tells us that different types of anger can be distinguished by their target, their action tendency, their aim, and the perspective that informs them. In doing this, she tries to correct the historical tendency to measure anger only by its intensity or by whether or not it can be rationalized. Not to mention the anger at certain kinds of targets that also adopts particular aims and produce specific actions &mdash; and also invites more or less critique. 

**Q.** What kind of social justice related anger tends to be met with disgust, and what kind tends to be met with applause?

Cherry uses "rage" purposely in the tradition of race scholars who use "Black rage." She walks us through five varieties in her typology. Rogue rage, a nihilistic rage at perceived injustice blaming everyone and everything (Internet trolls); wipe rage, a hate-filled zero-sum anger that tries to eliminate its scapegoated targets (like the Charlottesville neo-Nazi march); ressentiment rage, a reactive anger against a racial group in power that ultimately recenters the powerful because it only defines itself against others (like an Indigenous person angry at all white people in America which undermines their anger at the legitimate targets); narcissistic rage, anger at an unjust system not because of its injustice but because they can’t exempt themselves from it, so they don't focus on systems as a whole (like cis women focusing on feminism excluding trans rights and WOC rights); and finally Lordean rage, which unlike the other types isn’t necessarily destructive. Lordean rage targets those complicit in perpetrating racial injustice; the action tendency of Lordean rage is to transform it and use it for energy. The goal of Lordean rage is change, ideally to a better state, but it could also mean getting worse. She does note that Lordean rage &mdash; while unlikely to do so &mdash; can go wrong: it can cause people to abandon those they should be concerned about, to abandon other- and self-directed care, to constantly act from a place of rage, resulting in burnout and distress. 

The point though is that anger motivates us in more than one way. Anyone can tap into this. As Cherry says, "Lordean rage may require us to have moral sensitivity and moral imagination, but not necessarily moral excellence. It is within reach." It isn't rare or confined to Aristotelian virtue. And it certainly isn't meant to be overcome or replaced, and gives us a better sense of emotional diversity.