---
layout: page
title: 2.1 - Philosophical Fanfiction
nav_exclude: true
---

# 2.1 - Philosophical Fanfiction

Welcome, comrades. Before we get into it today, I want to remind you to select your roles and choose your display names if you haven't already. Also, obtain a composition notebook for the class, and a book (used, short, fiction, nonfiction, doesn't matter &mdash; but make sure the book is print-based and prose, i.e. no graphic novels) that you don't mind destroying. We'll begin using these materials in upcoming weeks for in- and out-of-class writing exercises.

Kim's "Why Don't We Just Kill the Kid in the Omelas Hole" is an explicit answer to LeGuin's "The Ones Who Walk Away from Omelas." Content- and craft-wise, it modernizes LeGuin's "Omelas" in a *fixed* way &mdash; as in we aren't invited to co-construct the world the way LeGuin asks us to. 

Would someone like to summarize the action and events of the story, so we can spend most of our time on craft? Note that this story lends itself to summaries that sound monotonous and bureaucratic, despite the (subdued?) horror of the content.

To bring the focus back to craft, Kim borrows several craft techniques and structures from LeGuin (like asides to the reader, re-visionary worldbuilding, and confusion of perspective) while radically revising or introducing others &mdash; like specific word substitutions (kid for child, Omelans for people of Omelas, descriptions that feel facetious, like "a very real physical way that was not a metaphor," instead of vivid descriptions we're meant to believe).

There's a difference of course between real online mobilization &mdash; digital activism is important and extremely effective when done well &mdash; and performing virtue or protecting one's image or brand. Kim's Omelas is heavily into protecting their image and brand (Nice House Having).

This short story is, like LeGuin's "Omelas," also a piece of philosophical fiction, albeit one that renders a more concrete world, city, people, and the systems of power and institutions that govern and bind them. It's also a kind of homage or fanfiction (a genre often used to resistive, socially just ends). It positions itself in conversation with "Omelas" but updates the concept, setting, and languaging of things. The story itself is firmly contemporary, including references to Kim Kardashian's first sex tape and Wikipedia. The absence of possibility outside of a binary choice in "Omelas," as mentioned last time, is subverted here with a new choice: killing the kid. This is presented as a coalitional act of resistance, carried out by a collective of kid-killers, where the murders are done in secret but are always a public act because of the nature of Omelas: tragedy is unknown there as long as there's a load-bearing kid in the hole; thus, the death of the kid is always accompanied by a spate of publicly experienced and broadcast disasters, accidents, and widespread suffering. 

Here, each aside is an act of worldbuilding for us, not with us. Dialogue and specific though unnamed characters are introduced in ways that drive the point home. Word substitutions that change how readers approach the world. For instance, what changes in the change from people of Omelas to Omelans (and non-Omelans)? Language and arrangement convey a narrator who &mdash; unlike LeGuin's narrator, who is astonished, enraptured, and accusatory by turns &mdash; is a little over it, a little bored of having to talk through the same old story over and over. A firmly expository style that itself reads like some longform social media post: a Substack post, a Medium article, a buckle-up Twitter thread, that aims to inform but can't escape its own special combination of jadedness, tired indignation, maybe a touch of self-important above-it-allness. In fact, the presence of news broadcasts and social media (made believable by the expansion of the world with the introduction of non-Omelans) emphasizes publicity in this Omelas as well as the divide between utopia and ordinary society. Factions are implied to have blurry boundaries after a while, as suggested by the slippage of "they," as some of you observed. 

Sensationalistic spectacle and compassion fatigue go hand-in-hand in the preservation of systemic abuses and social injustice. Craft techniques subtly reinforce this message. Kim's story is blunt, to-the-point, only (unironically) uses poetry twice: "a drop of blood, in a bowl of milk," first an explicit analogy for the child, then near the ending like a refrain. Notably, it opens with "So" &mdash; informal, conversational, dropping us in the middle of the action; it sequences events, especially horrors, with little fanfare or vivid description; it ends with a 2-3-2 repetition, "thank god, thank god, what, what, what, thank god, thank god."

*Some Questions and Line Analysis*

How craft conveys the horror: "Many non-Omelan people said a lot of very mean things (no one outside Omelas had a good and normal relationship with social media), like that the Omelans were monsters for letting the load-bearing suffering child exist and therefore everything about Omelas was fucked beyond belief, and had they known about the load-bearing suffering child, they never would have visited Omelas' beautiful beaches and nightclubs and festivals, because the knowledge of the child was so goddamn fucking horrific and tainted everything. And maybe it was the  Omelans who should be killed" (p. 2)

How does detail (or lack thereof), description (or lack thereof), or other stylistic techniques provoke a confrontation between the reader and themselves &mdash; their relationship to publicity, their own performance of virtue versus actual concrete action, their tendency (or lack thereof) to "mine" moments for clout or for indignation in order to perform virtue &mdash; and/or the reader and their prioritization for their own convenience and comfort over the suffering of others?