---
layout: page
title: 1.2 - Philosophical Fiction
nav_exclude: true
---

# 1.2 - Philosophical Fiction

I also encourage you to keep this question in mind at all times: With regards to *form* more than narrative (plot, character, setting), how does this piece move us closer to a socially just reality?

"Omelas" is a work of philosophical fiction, which couples storytelling and a critical exploration of specific philosophical questions by using worldbuilding, characterization, abstraction, and craft to stage a confrontation between the reader and their preconceived notions regarding that specific existential question or ethical dilemma. In other words, it uses storytelling as the means to offer an interpretation of a philosophical theory or argument, through an interplay between narrative and philosophy that never explicitly tells the reader what the issue at hand is or what they're meant to think about it. Horror, sci-fi, fantasy, the lyric essay &mdash; as innately speculative and resistive genres or modes of writing &mdash; align with philosophical or theoretical fiction.

However, what strikes me every time I read this isn't its philosophical quandary, or the description of the utopian city, or the constant appeals to me, the listener/reader &mdash; no, it's actually a single line you could almost call a throwaway: "All smiles have become old." Something about this line makes it feel out of place to me. I ask myself why: this relatively simple line, sandwiched between a sentence with the same rhythm and length and a longer one, between a sentence using informal second-person and a sentence using a more formal arrangement of the same, the line that bothers me every time is a line that completely eliminates an identifiable point-of-view. A generalization posed as fact. Set amidst descriptions we're asked to doubt &mdash; no, *assumed* to doubt; rhetorical questions we can't answer, insistences too strong to believe &mdash; I have to ask myself, from a craft perspective, about this seemingly unassuming little line &mdash; why do I feel like *this* is the description I am unequivocally supposed to believe?

Lots of things &mdash; critical inquiry, creative inspiration, the activist impulse &mdash; begin with "Why does this bother me?" And many of your responses originated from something that bothered you, even if it was difficult to name or explain. 

LeGuin's narrator, easily an "I" who is a speaker and an "I" who is your own inner monologue &mdash; someone telling you a story, or you telling yourself one &mdash; describes an idyllic summer festival out of some high fantasy country. 

The narrator, or ourselves, asks: "Do you believe?" Knowing already the answer is "no" and readily modifying the utopia being built, a utopia we've already been told we can imagine however we like with "imagine it as you will" &mdash; what we have no choice in imagining, though, is the existence of the neglected, abused child. Because the single unavoidable and purposely ignored tenet that utilitarianism, late-stage capitalism, neoliberalism, post-imperialism and post-coloniality, techno-fascism blasts out at us is: The price of your comfort is someone else's suffering, but it isn't you, so remain indifferent. Only certain people get a chance at joy, and at the expense of others. Spin it how you like: a noble sacrifice, the "useless" being put to good "use," "that's just how it is," "I don't want to be inconvenienced." The utilitarian answer to [the trolley problem](https://neal.fun/absurd-trolley-problems/){:target="_blank"} is pull the lever to kill one and save many. The greater good.

Here are some contemporary social justice trolley problems that might illustrate how "Omelas," content-wise, works. Do you cross picket lines during workers' strikes? Do you use ChatGPT, Google Gemini, Grammarly AI, Zoom's AI notes, or any other GenAI system? Do you choose not to mask in indoor spaces and crowds? If your answer to any of these things is yes, do you make these choices imagining that you have witnessed the child at the foundation of Omelas and accepted it for the sake of your comfort and convenience?

Content- and craft-wise, "Omelas" is a comment on utilitarianism; LeGuin's work is genre-defying but is best understood through the lenses that informed her perspective on society, race, culture &mdash; anarchism, Taoism, and the groundbreaking work of her anthropologist father, who suggested culture was not racially or genetically predetermined or intrinsically more or less sophisticated. That is, culture doesn't emerge "naturally": it's constructed by historical, geographical, and environmental factors. Culture is not rigid; it's taught. Insisting on intrinsic, "natural" differences between peoples is to preserve the status quo of colonialism and its centering of Euro-Westernness, whiteness, able-bodymindedness, straightness, maleness. 

Reductively, all three of these lenses strongly suggest that imperialism, colonialism, capitalism, techno-fascism, all the ills of the right-now, are not the only way. If people believed this, it would be dangerous. To believe this is to realize that the status quo can be disturbed.

The prose itself is "utilitarian": even the vivid descriptions of Omelas don't give us something we can really sink our teeth into. To riff on the "show don't tell" adage, everything is tell in the guise of show. There is the repeating question, "How [to describe] Omelas?" coupled with the similarly inviting "What else should there be?" So when assertions like "All smiles have grown old" or "One thing I know there was none of in Omelas is guilt" are made &mdash; telling us, brooking no question or argument &mdash; it's in stark contrast to feeling like we collaborated in making this place. 

Some lines to consider as models:

"Yet I repeat, these were not simple folk. They were not less complex than us. The trouble is that we have a bad habit, encouraged by scholars and philosophers, as considering happiness as something rather stupid. Only pain is intellectual, only evil is interesting." *Only* and *only* form a parallel structure; depending on how you read it, it's 9 to 9 or 9 to 8 syllables: equal pacing or a decrescendo, but pointedly not an increase. The narrator isn't building to something new; the thought is delivered here with finality. 

What happens if you flip it? *Only evil is interesting, only pain is intellectual.* We're building up to something now. We might anticipate something more, something we can argue with. The order here thwarts that feeling, pressing in deep the sense of our passive complicity. If we can't answer "Why is walking away the only alternative offered?," we can think about "Why does a binary choice make sense here?" Because craft techniques designed to lull us into passivity reinforce the sense that all of this is inevitable; nothing else is imaginable. When you can't imagine anything else, but horror compels refusal, all there is to do is walk away.

"They know that they, like the child, are not free. They know compassion. It is the existence of the child and their knowledge of its existence." *They*, and *they*. 10, and 3, makes 13. This is why it reads "are not free" instead of "aren't." Rhythm is mathematical, and if it wasn't 10 and 3 and 13, it would be off. Poetics and mathematics overlap.

For instance, English-language speakers expect groups of 1 or 3, making 2s or 4s incongruous, unsettling. In contrast to the 1s or 3s of the description of Omelas, look how many 2s there are in the description of the child.

I point these moments out to nudge you towards looking at craft first, story second, because if the craft were different, the story would not have the same effect. Form can work against or with the text's argument. Here, it carries it. For instance, these lighthearted questions frame our participation in constructing and maintaining systems of oppression as innocent and naive, but the narrator also seems to know that, as a few of you observed, we know better than to believe.